Guide for migrating from v2 to v3 (#6095)
redhat-developer/odo: docs/website/docs/user-guides/v3-migration-guide.md

---
title: Migrate from v2 to v3
sidebar_position: 2
---

### Where are `odo push` and `odo watch` commands?
`odo push` and `odo watch` have been replaced in v3 by a single command - `odo dev`. It does the job of two commands 
in a single command, and also allows the user to not watch if `--no-watch` flag is passed. 

In v2, if you wanted to automatically sync the code on developer system with the application running on a Kubernetes
cluster, you had to perform two steps - first `odo push` to start the application on the cluster, and second `odo watch`
to automatically sync the code. In v3, `odo dev` performs both actions with a single command.

`odo dev` is not _just_ a replacement for these two commands. It's also different in behaviour in that, it's a 
long-running process that's going to block the terminal. Hitting `Ctrl+c` will stop the process and cleanup the 
component from the cluster. In v2, you had to use `odo delete`/`odo component delete` to delete inner loop resources 
of the component from the cluster.

> ### Migrate existing odo component from v2 to v3

Author: Makes sense. Moved.

### What happened to Ingress/Route?
If you have used odo v2, you must have used Ingress (on Kubernetes) or Route (on OpenShift) to access the 
application that was pushed to the cluster using `odo push`. odo v3 no longer creates an Ingress or a Route. Instead,
it uses port-forwarding.

With v3, when you do `odo dev`, odo forwards a port on the development system to the port on the Kubernetes/OpenShift 
cluster mapping to your running application. It also prints the information when the application has started on the 
cluster. You would see a message like below:
```shell
$ odo dev
...
...
-  Forwarding from 127.0.0.1:40001 -> 8080
```
This indicates that the port 40001 on the development system has been forwarded to port 8080 of the application 
represented by the current odo component.

:::info NOTE
odo no longer supports creation of Ingress/Route out of the box. Hence, `odo url` set of commands do not exist in v3.
:::

### Changes to the way component debugging works
In odo v2, `odo push --debug` was used to run a component in debug mode. To setup port forwarding to the component's
debug port, you had to run `odo debug port-forward`.

> In odo v3, you need to specify the debug port in the `devfile.yaml` as an endpoint, and run `odo dev --debug` to 

Author: I have added the container component info. PTAL.

start the component in debug mode.

### Commands added, modified or removed in v3

The following table contains a list of odo commands that have either been modified or removed. In case of a 
modification, the modified command is mentioned in the `v3` column. Please refer below legend beforehand:
* 👷 currently not implemented, but might get implemented in future
* ❌ not implemented, no plans for implementation

| v2           | v3 |
|--------------|--|
| app delete   | ❌ |
| app describe | ❌ |
| app list     | ❌ |
| catalog describe service| ❌ |
| catalog describe component | registry --details |
| catalog list service | 👷odo list services |
| catalog list component | registry |
| catalog search service | ❌ |
| catalog search component | registry --filter |
| config set | ❌ |
| config unset | ❌ |
| config view | ❌ | 
| debug info | ❌ (not needed as debug mode is start with odo dev --debug command that blocks terminal, the application can be running in inner-loop mode only if odo dev is running in terminal) |

> | debug port-forward  | ❌(port forwarding is automatic when users execute odo dev --debug) |

Author: Modified. PTAL.

---
title: Migrate from v2 to v3

> sidebar_position: 2

Reviewer: maybe sidebar position 4 so it's below everything else / after the advanced usage guide?

---

> ### Migrate existing odo component from v2 to v3

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Migrate an existing `odo` component from v2 to v3
```

Author: Done

> If you have created an odo component using odo v2, this section will help you move it to use odo v3.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have created an odo component using odo v2, this section will help you move it to use odo v3.

```

Reviewer: add newline :)

Reviewer: Actually, this may be better as you are just rewording the title?

```suggestion
Before migrating to odo v3 you must delete your application and re-run it:
```

Author: I don't understand what exactly you are suggesting here. Replacing the current statement with `Before migrating to odo v3 you must delete your application and re-run it:` is not making sense to me.

> 1. `cd` into the component directory, and delete the component from the Kubernetes cluster:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Step 1. `cd` into the component directory, and delete the component from the Kubernetes cluster:
```

Reviewer: Step 1, step 2, etc.

Reviewer: You also don't necessarily need to `cd` into the directory ;)

Perhaps just say: "Delete the component from the Kubernetes cluster:"

    ```shell
    odo delete
   ```

> 2. Download and install odo v3 by following the steps mentioned [here](../overview/installation.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Download and [install odo v3](../overview/installation.md).
```

Author: Done.

> 3. Use [`odo dev`](../command-reference/dev.md) to start developing your application using odo v3.

Reviewer: Implies user already knows odo, so maybe this would be better:

Author: You missed something here?

> 3. Use [`odo dev`](../command-reference/dev.md) to start developing your application using odo v3.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Run [`odo dev`](../command-reference/dev.md)
```

Author: Done.

> 4. You can also use `odo list` to see a list of components that are running on the cluster and which version of odo

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Run `odo list` to see a list of components that are running on the cluster and what version of `odo` they are running.
```

Author: Done.

   was used to create them.

> If you face any problem, [open an issue on odo's repository](https://github.com/redhat-developer/odo/issues/new?assignees=&labels=&template=Bug.md).

Reviewer: Should remove this? This is implied from our contributing / community section.

Author: Removed.

### Where are `odo push` and `odo watch` commands?

> `odo push` and `odo watch` have been replaced in v3 by a single command - `odo dev`. It does the job of two commands 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`odo push` and `odo watch` have been replaced in v3 by a single command - `odo dev`.
```

Remove the fluff :)

> in a single command, and also allows the user to not watch if `--no-watch` flag is passed. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: Done.

In v2, if you wanted to automatically sync the code on developer system with the application running on a Kubernetes
cluster, you had to perform two steps - first `odo push` to start the application on the cluster, and second `odo watch`

> to automatically sync the code. In v3, `odo dev` performs both actions with a single command.

Reviewer: Too many sentences that can be summed up as:

`odo dev` now performs both `odo push` and `odo watch` actions as one command.

Author: I prefer not to assume the user to be too smart. They can skim through the part or ignore it if they already understand. But for general purpose, I think this would be useful.

`odo dev` is not _just_ a replacement for these two commands. It's also different in behaviour in that, it's a 
long-running process that's going to block the terminal. Hitting `Ctrl+c` will stop the process and cleanup the 
component from the cluster. In v2, you had to use `odo delete`/`odo component delete` to delete inner loop resources 
of the component from the cluster.

> 

Reviewer: Too many sentences too:

Can be summed up as:

`odo dev` performs differently than `odo push` and `odo watch`. It is a long-running terminal command. There are now multiple keyboard shortcuts that can refresh and clean up the component from the cluster.

Author: https://github.com/redhat-developer/odo/pull/6095#discussion_r970781022

### What happened to Ingress/Route?
If you have used odo v2, you must have used Ingress (on Kubernetes) or Route (on OpenShift) to access the 
application that was pushed to the cluster using `odo push`. odo v3 no longer creates an Ingress or a Route. Instead,

> it uses port-forwarding.

Reviewer: `odo` v3 no longer uses Ingress (Kubernetes) or Route (OpenShift) and instead uses port-forwarding. 

Something like that?

> With v3, when you do `odo dev`, odo forwards a port on the development system to the port on the Kubernetes/OpenShift 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When running `odo dev`, `odo` forwards a port on the development system to the port on the container cluster. Allowing you remote access to your deployed application. 
```

Author: Deon.

> cluster mapping to your running application. It also prints the information when the application has started on the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

It also prints the information when the application has started on the 
```

Author: Done

> cluster. You would see a message like below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cluster:
```

Author: Done.

```shell
$ odo dev
...
...
-  Forwarding from 127.0.0.1:40001 -> 8080
```
This indicates that the port 40001 on the development system has been forwarded to port 8080 of the application 

> represented by the current odo component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
represented by the current `odo` component.
```

Author: Done.

:::info NOTE

> odo no longer supports creation of Ingress/Route out of the box. Hence, `odo url` set of commands do not exist in v3.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`odo` no longer supports creation of Ingress / Route out of the box. The `odo url` set of commands no longer exist in v3.
```

Author: Done.

:::

### Changes to the way component debugging works
In odo v2, `odo push --debug` was used to run a component in debug mode. To setup port forwarding to the component's
debug port, you had to run `odo debug port-forward`.

> In odo v3, you need to specify the debug port in the `devfile.yaml` as an endpoint, and run `odo dev --debug` to 

Reviewer: odo should be `odo` throughout this doc :)

Author: Done.

|service create/delete/describe/list|❌|
|storage create/delete/list|❌|
|test|👷(will be implemented after v3-GA) #6070|
|url create/delete/list| ❌ (odo dev automatically sets port forwarding between container and localhost. If users for some reason require Ingress or Route for inner-loop development they will have to explicitly define them in the devfile as kubernetes components)|
|build-images|build-images| 
|deploy|deploy|
|login|login|
|logout|logout|
|create / component create|init|
|delete / component delete|delete component|
|describe / component describe|describe component|
|exec / component exec|❌|
|link / component link|add binding|list / component list|
|list|log / component log|
|logs|push / component push|in v3 there is only dev command that behaves more like watch in v2. There is an option to disable automatic reloads when a file is changed (--no-watch) in future there will be an option to trigger “sync” explicitly when --no-watch option is used)|
|status / component status|❌|
|unlink / component unlink|remove binding|
|watch / component watch|dev|
|❌|describe binding|
|❌|list binding|

> |❌|analyze |

Reviewer: Format this table? https://tabletomarkdown.com/format-markdown-table/

Author: Done.

you remote access to your deployed application. It also prints the information when the application has started on the
cluster:
```shell
$ odo dev
...
...
-  Forwarding from 127.0.0.1:40001 -> 8080
```
This indicates that the port 40001 on the development system has been forwarded to port 8080 of the application 
represented by the current `odo` component.

:::info NOTE
`odo` no longer supports creation of Ingress / Route out of the box. The `odo url` set of commands no longer exist 
in v3.
:::

### Changes to the way component debugging works
In `odo` v2, `odo push --debug` was used to run a component in debug mode. To setup port forwarding to the component's
debug port, you had to run `odo debug port-forward`.

In `odo` v3, you need to specify the debug port in the `devfile.yaml` as an endpoint, and run `odo dev --debug` to 
start the component in debug mode. For example, a `container` component in the devfile should look like below, where 
port 3000 is the application port and 5858 is the debug port:

```yaml
- name: runtime
  container:
    image: registry.access.redhat.com/ubi8/nodejs-12:1-36
    memoryLimit: 1024Mi
    endpoints:
    - name: "3000-tcp"
      targetPort: 3000

>     - name: "5858-tcp"

Reviewer 2: Could you call it `debug` instead? This is the convention we will be trying to use for Debug endpoints. See https://github.com/redhat-developer/odo/issues/5988#issuecomment-1239497488 and https://github.com/redhat-developer/odo/issues/6036
Setting also the exposure to "none", otherwise the endpoint will be "public" by default.

```suggestion
    - name: debug
      exposure: none
```

Author: Done.

---
title: Migrate from v2 to v3
sidebar_position: 2
---

### Where are `odo push` and `odo watch` commands?
`odo push` and `odo watch` have been replaced in v3 by a single command - `odo dev`. It does the job of two commands 
in a single command, and also allows the user to not watch if `--no-watch` flag is passed. 

In v2, if you wanted to automatically sync the code on developer system with the application running on a Kubernetes
cluster, you had to perform two steps - first `odo push` to start the application on the cluster, and second `odo watch`
to automatically sync the code. In v3, `odo dev` performs both actions with a single command.

`odo dev` is not _just_ a replacement for these two commands. It's also different in behaviour in that, it's a 
long-running process that's going to block the terminal. Hitting `Ctrl+c` will stop the process and cleanup the 
component from the cluster. In v2, you had to use `odo delete`/`odo component delete` to delete inner loop resources 
of the component from the cluster.

### Migrate existing odo component from v2 to v3

> If you have created an odo component using odo v2, this section will help you move it to use odo v3.

Reviewer 2: It could be helpful to mention that users can run `odo list` in v3, to see which components are running and in which version.

Author: Makes sense. But I have added this as fourth point in this section instead of the brief intro because it is something that is available to the user after they have downloaded odo v3.

1. `cd` into the component directory, and delete the component from the Kubernetes cluster:
    ```shell

>     $ odo delete -f

Reviewer 2: It would be safer to run `odo delete`, without `-f`, I think.
